---
title: "DSL and AST"
date: 2022-10-30 11:00:00 +0200
categories: lecture
tags: synthesis
math: true
---

### What is DSL

In program synthesis, choosing an appropriate **program notation** is crucial.
A more *narrow* notation that *only* precisely captures the relevant program space increases the efficiency of program search.
**Domain specific language (DSL)** refers to *specialized* languague notations that define these relevant programs with a limited set of functions. 
DSL is convenitent to be described with **functional programming** which is more consise and expressive than general purpose programming languages.

### How to write DSL 

A *parse tree* represents a program syntax, it is usually described in *context free gramma (CFG)*.
The following parse tree CFG stands for the syntax a simple arithmetic language:

```haskell

expr := term | term + expr

term := (expr) | term * term | N

```

The gramma captures syntaic information: `*` has a higher precedence over `+`,e.g., `5 + 3 * 2` is an expression that can only be decomposed into `term + expr` where `expr = 5` and `term = 3 * 2` as the gramma does not allow the term to be the addition of 2 expr.
The decomposition of the given expression starts by searching a *pattern* that fits and then decompose the expression *recursively* based on the pattern.
However, the expression `(5 + 3) * 2` is deemed as a big term, which is a multiplicaiton of 2 terms where one term is `(expr)`.

An **abstract syntax tree (AST)** of the same arithmetic language *ignores* syntaic (e.g., precedence, parenthesis) details.
AST represents code as a **data structure**:

```haskell

data AST = Num Int | Plus AST AST | Times AST AST

```

The AST representation removes the parenthesis and the distinction between a term and an expression.
While `(5 + 3) * 2` and `5 + 3 * 2` are still distinguishable as they are constructed differently.
E.g., `(5 + 3) * 2 = Times (Plus 5 3) 2` and `5 + 3 * 2 = Plus 5 (Times 3 2)`.

The CFG version of the above AST is:

```haskell

expr := N | expr + expr | expr * expr

```

In summary, AST is another layer of **abstraction** of parse tree to remove more syntaic details while still captures the same program space. 
However, it could be hard to find a *closed* data structure for arbitrary program space.
